---
title: Basics of useState hook
template: post
slug: useState-basic
draft: false
startedOn: "2021-07-18",
lastEditedOn: ""
description:
cover: ./.jpeg
category: react
tags:
  - react
  - hook
  - useState
---

# A brief intro to states in react

Even if you're an experienced react developer, you might have found yourself stumbling across the proper management of state. After all react itself is a statement management library ( as said by kent c dodds). Everything that we do in react eventally revolves around handling state and manipulating them. So, when you are starting with react, it's high time you realize all through out your career as a react developer you will be dealing with state management and render optimization that comes along with it.

## Structure of `useState` hook

<br/>

For now, lets start small. Do you know about array destructuring in javascript?? If not checkout `this article` that I've previously written as a part of es6 tutorial series.

Basically here is a small example:

```javascript
// Here I have just declare an array with two strings.
const state = ["this is state variable", "this is set State function"];

// without destructuring;
const x = state;

console.log(x[0]); // "this is state variable"
console.log(x[1]); // "this is set State function"

// With array destructuring;

const [firstValue, secondValue] = state;

console.log(firstValue); // "this is state variable"
console.log(secondValue); // "this is set State function"
```

I hope you get the gist. Now why am I talking about array destructuring? If you have tinkering on react with hooks for a while, then you have obviously come across this syntax:

```javascript
const [state, setState] = useState();
```

You might have been using this without understanding why it is done like that. So, Lets break the above expression. The `useState` is just a fancy way of writing a hook that returns an array. **Remember it's compulsory to add prefix "use" in function of react if you are building a custom hook**

`useState` is just a function that returns an array. The first element of the array is the state while the second element of the array is a function that sets the state.
so simply, what we could have done was:

```javascript
cosnt stateArray = useState();

// without array destructuring
const state = stateArray[0];
const setState = statearray[1];

//with array desctructing
// This is exactly same as above
const [state,setState] = useState()

```

Phew!! I hope you got that.

> Why do we need a function to set a value of a state?? Know more about this _here_

## Initialization

Now let's see why initializing state is different than initializing a random variable.

Open up your `create-react-app` environment. Go to you `app.js` file and copy the code below:

```javascript
import React, { useState } from "react";

const App = () => {
  const [state, setState] = useState(0);
  let count = 0;

  console.log("count", count);
  console.log("state", state);

  return (
    <button
      onClick={() => {
        count++;
        setState(state + 1);
      }}
    >
      Click me
    </button>
  );
};
export default App;
```

> The code above simply displays a button which when clicked changes the `state` and also changes the count variable.

Since state simply stores some data, it may seem irrelevant to make use of `useState` to get a `state` variable to store the data and a function to set that state. I mean, we could simply use a js variable to store a data:

```javascript
let count = 0;
```

but somehow this doesn't work. The output of `count` variable is always `0` while that of `state` keeps increasing as you click the button..Why is that?

You can see the console output by inspecting on the browser.

Let me show you in a simple way how your code is running.

//TODO flowchart picture

1. `state` is initialized to `0`
2. `count` is initialized to `0`
3. value of state and count both `0` are logged to the console.
4. Click the button
5. count is increased to `1`
6. state is increased to `1`

Now, when state is changed, the whole component gets rendered again. This is the most important and the core concept in react. Whenever any state of the component changes, the whole component gets re-rendered. I reiterate WHENEVER any STATE CHANGES, the component gets RE-RENDERED.

So as the value of the `state` is changed from `0` to `1` the component re-renders.

6. Component re-renders, Now this is important part. State doesn't get re-initialized on re-renders. The updated state is preserved across the renders.
7. But `count` gets reinitialized to `0`
8. value of `state` from previous render which is `1` is logged while the console output of `count` is still `0`

The process repeats as you keep clicking since with each click the state keeps updating.

There are still lot more to cover on states. But for now, let this sink in.
