---
title: Rendering Lists
template: post
slug: rendering-lists
draft: false
startedOn: "2021-07-19"
lastEditedOn: "2021-07-20"
description:
cover: ./.jpeg
category: react
tags:
  - react
  - map
  - key
  - list
  - array
---

## `map` vs `forEach` method of javascript

Do you know the difference between `map` and `forEach` method of array?

```javascript
const array = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

const x = array.map((each) => each * 2);

const y = array.forEach((each) => each * 2);

console.log("map method", x); // [2,4,6,8,10]
console.log("forEach method", y); // undefined
```

The output of `map` method is an array while forEach method doesn't have any output. If you want to know more about `map` vs `forEach` you can look at my article _here_.

For this article, it's enough to understand the output of each method. The output of a `map` method is an array while `forEach` doesn't give any output. This clear distinction between these two methods helps in understanding why `map` is used extensively in react.

## Rendering JSX elements in react

Copy the following code in your `create-react-app` environment and add it in your `app.js` file.

```javascript
import React from "react";

const App = () => {
  const number = 123;
  const string = "I am a string";
  const array = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
  return (
    <div>
      {number}
      {string}
      {array}
    </div>
  );
};
export default App;
```

We can use javacript expression by wrapping it in curly `"{}"` braces in _JSX_.So, You should see that react will successfully display the value of string, number and an array on the browser.

For now we'll not be going into what datatypes cannot be rendered by react, to know more about these _read here_. `Mind you, Objects cannot be rendered by react`.

What I want you to focus in this part, is that along with strings and numbers we can also render an array within the JSX. So why is that important? Lets combine our knowledge about the previous section on output of `map` method and the capability of react ro render an array on the screen.

```jsx
import React from "react";

const App = () => {
  const number = 123;
  const string = "I am a string";
  const array = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
  const mappedArray = array.map((each) => each * 2);
  console.log("mappedArray", mappedArray); //[2,4,6,8,10]
  return (
    <div>
      {number}
      {string}
      {array}
      <p>mapped Array: {mappedArray}</p>
      <p>mapped Expression: {array.map((each) => each * 2)} </p>
    </div>
  );
};

export default App;
```

If you run the above code, you should see the mappedArray being rendered on the screen using both the `variable` mappedArray and the expression `array.map((eeach=>each*2))`. Since as mentioned in the first section the ouput of `map` method is an array and as mentioned in the second section array is a valid react child, we can see both the mapped Array and mapped Expression being displayed on the screen.

## `key` in array rendering.

Okay! Lets see another example.

```jsx
import React from "react";

const App = () => {
  const names = [
    "Jordan Walke",
    "Dan Abramov",
    "Kent C. Dodds",
    "Tanner Linsley",
  ];

  return (
    <div>
      {names.map((each) => (
        <p>{each}</p>
      ))}
    </div>
  );
};

export default App;
```

This might seem a bit weird for you. Let me explain, Here we have used a map method on `names` array and returned `jsx element` i.e. `<p>{each}</p>`. It should be clear by now that the output of the `map` expression is an array of jsx element.

```jsx
<div>
  {names.map((each) => <p>{each}</p>)}
</div>

// output of above expression
<div>
  <p>Jordan Walke</p>
  <p>Dan Abramov </p>
  <p>Kent C. Dodds </p>
  <p>Tanner Linsley </p>
</div>;
```

Now you should be seeing names being displayed on the browser. If you inspect the element (`how?`) you should be able to see each name being wrapped by `p` tag like the output mentioned above.

The browser displays the result the way we want it to, but react seems to complain. In the `console tab` a warning message like the one below appears.

> Warning: Each child in a list should have a unique "key" prop.

For now, if you are just a beginner, I want you to understand that when you are mapping an array to display some jsx , just add a unique "key" _prop_ to the wrapper element. `Why?` learn about this _here_.

So what do I mean by "unique key prop to the wrapper element" ?

```jsx
const names = [
  "Jordan Walke",
  "Dan Abramov",
  "Kent C. Dodds",
  "Tanner Linsley",
];

return (
  <div>
    {names.map((each) => (
      <p key={each}>{each}</p>
    ))}
  </div>
);
```

In the above code I've added a `key` in `p` tag and assigned it's value to `each`. The given mapping expression returns a jsx element which is wrapped by a `p` tag, so `p` is our wrapper element. Now if we look at the names array, we can see that each and every names are different and hence unique. _The first parameter of the callback function of map method is each element of the array on each iteration_. That means the value of "each",in our case, is different/unique on each iteration.

So, I've assigned a unique value (`each`) to "key" prop to the wrapper element `p`.

Remember the key must be **unique**. Here I am certain that the `names` array contains unique names only so that's why I assigned this value to the `key` prop. If by any chance, there were to be any duplicate values on the `names` array. I should find a better alternative.

for example let's say that the `names` array contains the following data:

```javascript
const names = [
  "Jordan Walke",
  "Dan Abramov",
  "Kent C. Dodds",
  "Tanner Linsley",
  "Dan Abramov",
];
```

Here, The name 'Dan Abramov' is repeated twice. So, in this case we shouldn't assign name as a key because the names aren't unique. Though, this will work for our example but as the project get complex you might run into issues and undetectable bugs so you can see in your browser console react explicitly warns you about the duplicate keys.

We will learn about how to deal with such problems while learning to render objects and understand the importance of `key` on advance lessons.

# Just for fun

For now, Lets see a simple usage much bettter than displaying names.

```jsx
import React from "react";
import "./App.css";

const App = () => {
  const classNames = ["primary", "secondary", "warning", "danger"];

  return (
    <div>
      {classNames.map((each) => (
        <button key={each} className={each}>
          {each}
        </button>
      ))}
    </div>
  );
};

export default App;
```

Run the code above and add some css property to `App.css` file for classNames `primary`, `secondary`, `warning`, `danger`. Maybe something like this..

```css
.primary {
  padding: 1rem 1.5rem;
  border-radius: 0.5rem;
  margin: 1rem;
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  background: purple;
  color: white;
  border: none;
}
.secondary {
  padding: 1rem 1.5rem;
  border-radius: 0.5rem;
  margin: 1rem;
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  background: grey;
  color: white;
  border: none;
}
.warning {
  padding: 1rem 1.5rem;
  border-radius: 0.5rem;
  margin: 1rem;
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  background: #ffcc00;
  color: white;
  border: none;
}
.danger {
  padding: 1rem 1.5rem;
  border-radius: 0.5rem;
  margin: 1rem;
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  background: #cc3300;
  color: white;
  border: none;
}
```

> We're repeating a lot of css here. We will be learning on optimizing them soon. For now, play with list rendering, customize css and keep learning

-- To be continued

//TODO

Questions?

1. What is jsx Element
2. Object can't be a valid react child
3. array methods
4. `{}` in react
