---
title: Basics of event handling
template: post
slug: basic-event-handling
draft: false
startedOn: "2021-07-23",
lastEditedOn: "2021-07-23"
description:
cover: ./.jpeg
category: react
tags:
  - react
  - onClick
  - onChange
  - onBlur
  - onFocus
  - event handlers
  - event
---

## Events handling

Javascript is an `event-driven` language. It doesn't run continously rather it waits for some events to happen.Simply stating, events can be anything through which you interact with the browser. Like moving your mouse, clicking on a button, typing something,.... Just imagine how you are interacting with any website, with your browsers those things trigger an event. As a programmer, you can listen to that events and run your programs. Say, you want to display a message on the browser when a user triggers an event by clicking on a mouse. Just add an event listener which can listen if the button is clicked and then display the message. You can learn more about events _here_.

## Looking back to `onClick`

In previous articles, you have already handled an event. In useStateBasics sections, we've handled and onClick event to count the number clicks.

```javascript
import React, { useState } from "react";

const App = () => {
  const [state, setState] = useState(0);

  return (
    <button
      onClick={() => {
        setState(state + 1);
      }}
    >
      Click me
    </button>
  );
};
export default App;
```

The code above is extracted from useStateBasics section. It should be clear, by now, that when the button is clicked we update our state. Lets rephrase the statement:

> Here a user triggers an event by clicking the button. We are listening to the events using `onClick` which gets triggered when the user clicks the button. Now we are handling the click event on the `onClick` handler.

1. We want to update start when user clicks the button
2. We know that clicking the button is an event
3. Now, we program our code to listen to the event.
4. the click event can be listened on `onClick`
5. So we setup onClick props on the button with a callback : `onClick{()=>setState(state+1)}`
6. This `onClick` callback will be triggered whenever the user clicks the button.

This is a minor example of event handling in react. If you want to learn more about event handling in javascript read this _article_.

## `onChange` event handler

There are several events in javascript. We won't be covering all of them in this article. We will be focusing on some of the most used events only and as we progress over other tutorials we will be learning more.

Lets look at `onChange` event handler:

```jsx
import React from "react";

const App = () => {
  return (
    <div>
      <input
        onChange={(evt) => {
          console.log("event", evt);
          console.log("event.target", evt.target);
          console.log("event.target.value", evt.target.value);
        }}
      />
    </div>
  );
};

export default App;
```

In the code above, we have added `onChange` event handler to our `input` html. The `onChange` event handler listens to any changes that user makes on that input.

Now copy the code above in your `create-react-app` environment in app.js file and run the code. You should see an input element appearing on your browser. Open your browser's dev tool and look at the console output as you start typing something on the `input` element.

So what is that `evt` ? Well it's kinda complicated to explain. The first argument callback on every event handler (yes, even the `onClick` handler. Try it!) is a [synthetic event](https://reactjs.org/docs/events.html). It basically contains every information about that event, the element where the event occurs, all attached functions and values .. everything. Just expand that `event` object that appears on your browser's console.

We will however focus only on `evt.target.value` as of now. You should have known by now the output of `evt.target.value` is the word that you are typing on your `input` element.

Now, Let's say, We want our user to input their name and as they type we want to store what they type in our state and display on the browser.

```jsx
import React from "react";

const App = () => {
  const [name, setName] = useState();
  return (
    <div>
      <input
        onChange={(evt) => {
          setName(evt.target.value);
        }}
      />
      <p>Your name is {name}</p>
    </div>
  );
};

export default App;
```

The above code is similar to what we did to count the number of clicks in `onClick` event handler.

### onFocus, onBlur

When an element is focused then onFocus event handler is triggered. When an element which is focused is out of focus, then onBlur event handler is triggered. Simple as that.

Let's see it in an example:

```jsx
const App = () => {
  const [name, setName] = useState();
  const [isFocused, setIsFocused] = useState(false);
  return (
    <div>
      <input
        onChange={(evt) => {
          setName(evt.target.value);
        }}
        onFocus={() => {
          setIsFocused(true);
        }}
        onBlur={() => {
          setIsFocused(false);
        }}
      />
      <p>Your name is {name}</p>
      <p> Input element is {isFocused ? "Focused" : "Not Focused"}</p>
    </div>
  );
};

export default App;
```

We have added `onFocus`, `onBlur` and `onChange` event handler to the input element.

1. Initially isFocused is false. So like we studied in conditionalRendering The statement `Input element is Not Focused` will be displayed on the screen.
2. Click on input. As a blue outline appears (which means it is focused), onFocus event handler is triggered which sets the `isFocused` state to true
3. As state is changed, The componenent rerenders and the statement `Input element is Focused` is rendered.
4. If you click elsewhere, onBlur event is triggered which sets the `isFocused` state to false
5. As state is change. the component re renders and the statement `Input element is Not Focused` will be displayed on the screen.

## Just For Fun

We will create a simple background color changer project. We will be expanding on this project on an upcoming project tutorial. For now, lets see some basics.

Points to know:

1. `input` element can have [several `type`](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_form_input_types.asp). for example: type="number" to input only numbers, type="color" to input only colors. If any type isn't provided like we did in previous sections it assumes type="text".
2. We can provide styles to every element using `style` prop. CSS properties on the `style` object is camelCased. We will be learning about applying styles in react in next section. For now, lets see some basic implementation.

```jsx
const App = () => {
  const [color, setColor] = useState("#FFFFFF");
  return (
    <div
      style={{
        width: "100vw",
        height: "100vh",
        background: color,
      }}
    >
      <input
        onChange={(evt) => {
          setColor(evt.target.value);
        }}
        type="color"
      />
      <p> The Hex code for the color of background is :{color}</p>
    </div>
  );
};

export default App;
```

Copy the above code and run. You should see that a color input appears on the screen withe the text `The Hex code ofr the color of the background is :#FFFFFF`;

So What's happening?

1. Like I said, we can provide style to each element using `style` prop. Here, the `div` element has style of `width` `100vw` (which means width of whole browser) and `height` `100vh` (which means height of whole browser). The `div` simply expands over all the browser. The `background` property of the css is dynamic that means it changes as the our `color` state changes.

2. `input` element has `type="color"` which means it displays color input and we have attached onChange listener to it which changes the `color` state.
3. And if you didn't know, each color can be represented by `Hex` code.

We will keep on learning event handlers because there are still lot more to be discussed on. For now this it. Keep learning.
